Introduction to the Digital Research
====================================

> English 5100, Temple University, Spring 2016, 3 credits  
> Class meets Wednesdays, 9:30-11:45 pm  
> 416 Weiss Hall; Digital Scholarship Center, bottom floor of Paley
Library


> Peter Logan (<peter.logan@temple.edu>)  
> Office: 914 Anderson Hall, 215-204-8567  
> Office Hours: <span id="_Hlt503427994" class="anchor"></span>2:00-3:30
pm, Tuesday and Wednesday, and by appt.

### Description

This course introduces students to the concepts and tools needed to
conduct digital research in English. During the semester, we’ll discuss
how the broader field of the Digital humanities (DH) is defined, why
humanists are using digital tools to do their research, how the new
methods compare with older methods of humanities scholarship, and what
are their strengths and weaknesses.

This course gives you a chance to explore these new methods. We begin
with a focus on the basic theoretical and technological issues involved
in creating and analyzing digital texts, before moving on to a series of
hands-on exercises in analyzing words and interrogating the results.

By the end of the semester, students will understand the history,
theory, and technology of digital textual analysis and produce a 15-page
paper applying these new methods to material relevant to their own
interests or analyzing examples of digital-based criticism.

The field of DH values collaborative work far more than most other forms
of scholarship in the humanities. This is because every DH project
involves a collection of many discrete skills, far more than any one
person can generally master. In this course, students will be encouraged
to work collaboratively where possible. Part of the course will be
devoted to discussing the nature of collaborative work and how it
differs from “group work,” so that students learn how to work together
in productive and positive relationships.

Students should be comfortable using a computer and moving around in the
file system. No knowledge of computer programming is needed. If you own
a laptop, please bring it to class. If you do not, we’ll have laptops
available for you to work through the in-class exercises.

### Required Texts

Texts marked “Web” are online open-source materials. Some text citations
are preceded by an abbreviation used in the syllabus for reading
assignments.

- Jerome McGann, *Radiant Textuality: Literature After the World Wide Web*
(New York: Palgrave, 2001). Print.

- Franco Moretti, *Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary
History* (New York: Verso, 2005). Print.
- 
Franco Moretti, *Distant Reading* (New York: Verso, 2015). Print.

- Stephen Ramsay, *Reading Machines: Toward and Algorithmic Criticism*
(Urbana: U of Illinois P, 2011). Print.

- **(D\_H)** Anne Burdick, et al, [**Digital\_Humanities
**](https://mitpress.mit.edu/sites/default/files/titles/content/9780262018470_Open_Access_Edition.pdf)(Cambridge:
MIT P, 2012). Web.

- **(DDH)** Matthew K. Gold, [**Debates in the Digital
Humanities**](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates) (Minneapolis: U of
Minnesota P, 2012). Web.

- **(CDH)** Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth, [**Companion
to Digital Humanities
**](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/)*(Oxford: Blackwell,
2004). Web ().*

- **(LSDH)** Price and Seimans, [**Literary Studies in the Digital
Age**](https://dlsanthology.commons.mla.org/). Web.

- Daniel Powell, with Constance Crompton and Ray Siemens, [*“Glossary of
Terms, Tools, and Methods,” *Literary Studies in the Digital
Age**](https://dlsanthology.commons.mla.org/glossary-of-terms/). Web.

### Assignments and Grading

#### *Assignment \#1* (Feb. 10) 20%

Using at least two tools in AntConc, analyze the language of Charlotte
Bronte’s *Jane Eyre* and Louisa May Alcott’s *Little Women.* What does
the language tell us about the themes and novelistic world of each text?
What conclusions can you draw about the differences between them? Be
careful to document your stopword list and the settings used to get your
results. (5 pages/1500 words)

#### *Assignment \#2* (March 16) 20%

Write a short paper on any of the theoretical questions raised in the
readings so far in course, using several scholarly essays, at least one
from the syllabus so far.

#### *Assignment \#3* (April 20) 40%

The culminating event for the course is a 15-page paper. You can either
(1) apply digital research techniques to a corpus of your choice and
produce your own analysis; or (2) write a research paper critiquing
existing work in the field of digital literary studies.

#### Presentation 20%

Each student will present an analysis of one essay on the syllabus to
the class and lead a brief discussion about it.

### Disability Statement

Any student who has a need for accommodation based on the impact of a
documented disability, including special accommodations for access to
technology resources and electronic instructional materials required for
the course, should contact me privately to discuss the specific
situation by the end of the second week of classes or as soon as
practical. If you have not done so already, please contact Disability
Resources and Services (DRS) at 215-204-1280 in 100 Ritter Annex to
learn more about the resources available to you. I/we will work with DRS
to coordinate reasonable accommodations for all students with documented
disabilities.

### Compulsory Statement on Freedom

"Freedom to teach and freedom to learn are inseparable facets of
academic freedom. The University has a policy on Student and Faculty and
Academic Rights and Responsibilities (Policy \#03.70.02) which can be
accessed through the following link:
[*http://policies.temple.edu/getdoc.asp?policy\_no=03.70.02*](http://policies.temple.edu/getdoc.asp?policy_no=03.70.02)."


